For this first exercise for the chapter
we're going to create a base class called
account and then drive a checking account
from that base class account.
So let's get started.
We're gonna call this program account.py.
We'll
begin by creating the account class.
The class will have two fields, an account
number and a balance.
So we'll initialize those first and the
constructor.
Then we'll write a two string method.
[BLANK_AUDIO].
That will return the account number on one
line and the balance on another line.
[BLANK_AUDIO]
Like so.
Rather than defining methods for
depositing and withdrawing
money in the account class, we're gonna
move
that down to the checking class, which
we're
gonna create as a derived class from
account.
The first thing we do is we write class
checking
and then in parentheses we put the base
class account.
The constructor will take its parameters
the account number, the balance,
and a fee that the bank will charge when
making withdrawals.
So the first thing we do is we call the
base class constructor and
then set the fee as the only new field of
the checking class.
Next we'll define a two string method.
So again the first thing we are going to
do, we are going to create a
return string and the first thing we are
going to do is set up a little header.
And then we'll concatenate to that a call
to the base class to string method.
And then we'll return that string because
everything we
want, we don't need to put the fee in
that two string method if we wanted to see
the fee, we can write a separate method
for that.
Let's just do it real quick, and we'll use
it, and I'll
go ahead and find it so you can see what
it looks like.
And we'll return it, we don't have to
return it
as a string, we'll just return it as it
is.
Now let's define a deposit method.
That one is very easy.
We simply take the amount and add it to
the balance.
Nothing to that.
Then let's define a withdrawal method,
which is a little bit more complex.
Though not too much more.
First thing we have to do is we have to
see if the
amount they want to withdraw is more than
they have in their balance.
And if so we're gonna print insufficient
funds
otherwise we're going to adjust the
balance by
taking out the amount they want to
withdrawal
and the fee that is being charged for
withdrawals.
So for now that will do.
Let's test it out so we'll set up a new
checking account object with the account
number of 123, an initial balance of 500,
and a fee of fifty cents.
So the first thing we want to do is print
out the status of the account and let's
withdraw $100, print out the status again
and let's stop right there.
And save and run the program.
We left out one little problem, we do this
a lot.
Let's fix it, I know exactly where it is.
That should be self.fee cuz it is a field
of the class.
Let's try it again.
Let's clear the screen.
There we go.
So we start out with 500, and we withdraw
100.
And there's $0.50 so that leaves us with
399 50.
Let's do a deposit just to make sure
deposit works.
And we'll deposit 200, and then print the
status of the account again.
And you now see we have 599.50.
So
that wraps up this first exercise where I
demonstrated how to derive
a checking class, or checking account
class from a base account class.
Now, in the next exercise we're going to
create
a savings account class that also derives
from account.
Then I'm also gonna demonstrate how we can
mix those two account types together
using a concept called polymorphism and
have the Python system
figure out which type of object is which
based on its inherent type.
We're gonna see how to do all that in the
next exercise.